# matta

A library for your Jupyter Notebook that helps you to use and scaffold visualizations with [d3.js](http://d3js.org).

## Overview

matta is a visualization development support tool and a visualization library at the same time. Initially I implemented
it to help me develop visualizations in the context of my doctoral thesis. I was researching the mixture of algorithms
and visualizations, and therefore I was always iterating over algorithm and visualization design. 

Currently matta supports some visualizations that I needed to implement in my doctoral thesis.
The main idea is to have a generalizable template to build visualizations on, and to be able to reuse the visualizations
to explore data in the Jupyter Notebook.

An important aspect of matta is that it works with standard scientific Python data-structures: pandas DataFrames and NetworkX graphs.
By using matta to develop your visualization, you do not need to worry about data structures and formats. For instance,
have you ever found an example visualization that seemed to be what you wanted, but the data structure used was arbitrarily
chosen by the developer? And that structure was completely different from what you were using/expecting? 
By using matta there are no arbitrary choices - you use DataFrames and specify which columns will
be mapped to the visualization, and that's it.

## Python Support

matta works with Python 2.7. Python 3 support is planned to be added at some point (I have already started to migrate 
some stuff by using `__future__` imports).

## Examples / Documentation

In addition to this readme, the following notebooks serve as examples/documentation:

  * [Let's <del>Make</del> Scaffold a Barchart](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/carnby/matta/blob/master/examples/Let's%20Make%20a%20Barchart.ipynb)
  * [Basic Notebook Examples](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/carnby/matta/blob/master/examples/Basic%20Examples.ipynb)
  * [Let's Make a Map Too (and a Cartogram!)](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/carnby/matta/blob/master/examples/Let's%20Make%20a%20Map%20Too.ipynb)

## Initialization / Installation

First, install the python package:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py install
```

Then make a symbolic link in your IPython profile to matta libs:

```
~/.jupyter/custom$ ln -s ~/path_to_matta/matta/libs/ matta
```

And finally, edit the `custom.js` file and add the following lines:

```javascript
require.config({
    paths: {
          "sankey": "/custom/matta/d3-sankey/sankey", 
          "cartogram": "/custom/matta/d3-cartogram/cartogram", 
          "d3": "/custom/matta/d3/d3.min", 
          "leaflet": "/custom/matta/leaflet/leaflet", 
          "topojson": "/custom/matta/topojson/topojson.min", 
          "parsets": "/custom/matta/d3-parsets-1.2.4/d3.parsets", 
          "matta": "/custom/matta/matta", 
          "force_edge_bundling": "/custom/matta/d3-force-bundling/d3.ForceEdgeBundling", 
          "legend": "/custom/matta/d3-legend/d3-legend.min", 
          "cloud": "/custom/matta/d3-cloud/d3.layout.cloud", 
          "cola": "/custom/matta/cola/cola.min"
        },
    shim: {
      "sankey": {
        "exports": "d3.sankey", 
        "deps": ["d3"]
      }, 
      "cartogram": {
        "exports": "d3.cartogram", 
        "deps": ["d3"]
      }, 
      "cola": {
        "exports": "cola", 
        "deps": ["d3"]
      }, 
      "parsets": {
        "exports": "d3.parsets", 
        "deps": ["d3"]
      }, 
      "legend": {
        "exports": "d3.legend", 
        "deps": ["d3"]
      }
    },
});

require(['matta'], function(matta) {
    matta.add_css('/custom/matta/matta.css');
});
```

This will make Jupyter to load matta every time you load a notebook file. If you use an older version of Jupyter Notebook,
note that you will need to include the "/static" prefix to those URLs. This code can be generated by the function `matta.init_javascript_code(path='/custom/matta')`.

## Visualization Modules

All visualizations in matta are specified as Python modules. A module is composed of a configuration and several template and style files. 

The **"Let's <del>Make</del> Scaffold a Barchart"** example notebook contains a basic visualization that showcases some of these concepts.

### Template Files

The following are the template files rendered by matta:

  * `template.js`: the main template of each visualization module. Think of this file as the body of a `draw()` function in 
  a typical visualization module. 
  * `template.css` (optional)
  * `functions.js` (optional)

When matta renders your visualization, it embeds those files into a bigger visualization that follows the [reusable 
chart pattern](http://bost.ocks.org/mike/chart/) by Mike Bostock.

### Configuration

A visualization module must contain a dictionary named `VISUALIZATION_CONFIG` in its `__init__.py` file, 
with at least some of the following elements:

  * Options: these are values that influence how the visualization is rendered. For instance, the `cartography` visualization
  has the following options:
  ```python    
  'options': {
      'leaflet': False,
      'background_color': False,
      'graph_bundle_links': False
  }
  ```
  When rendering, if you call `cartography(geometry=topojson)`, the geometry you specified will be rendered as any other
  visualization: just a plain SVG with white background. But if you call `cartography(geometry=topojson, leaflet=True)`,
  the visualization will be rendered as a slippy map using [leaflet](http://leafletjs.com).
  
  * Data: this element indicates which data variables will be available to the visualization. For instance, the `cartogram`
  visualization has the following setup:
  ```python
  'data': {
      'geometry': None,
      'area_dataframe': None,
  }
  ```
  This means that a cartogram can be called with a `TopoJSON` geometry (which you should load from a `.js` file) 
  and a pandas DataFrame. In your visualization code, these variables will be available as `_data_geometry` and 
  `_data_area_dataframe`.
   
  * Variables: the elements of this dictionary are directly translated into variables available in the template file.
  For instance, in the `barchart` example available above, these are the variables:
  ```python
  'variables': {
      'width': 960,
      'height': 500,
      'padding': {'left': 30, 'top': 20, 'right': 30, 'bottom': 30},
      'x': 'x',
      'y': 'y',
      'y_axis_ticks': 10,
      'y_label': None,
      'rotate_label': True,
  }
  ```
  All these variables are available in the template file, with an underscore appended (e.g., `_width`). Moreover,
  you can modify them when rendering by using keyword arguments: `barchart(dataframe=df, x='letter', y='frequency')`. 
  
  * Auxiliary Variables: these are Javascript variables that are available to the template code, but are not 
  reachable from Python nor the public JS interface. You can use them to mantain state in the visualization or to 
  cache results. This is an example from the `cartography` visualization:
  ```python
    'auxiliary': {
        # a set to save mark positions. since there are two possible sources of positions, we need to do this.
        'mark_positions',
        # the list of available features from the geometry source.
        'available_feature_ids',
        # the list of colors per area
        'area_colors'
    }  
  ``` 
  Those variables are available as `auxiliary.var_name` (e.g., `auxiliary.mark_positions`).
  
  * Read-only Properties: these are JS variables that are available in Javascript through getters. For instance, in the `cartography`
  visualization you can have a Leaflet instance, among other variables:
  ```python
        'read_only': {
        # leaflet
        'L',
        'map',
        # the map projection. this could be used to add other things on top of the visualization.
        'projection',
        # here we save the geometry specified - it can be either GeoJSON or TopoJSON.
        'geometry'
    }
  ```
  
   If your reusable chart is called `chart`, then, from Javascript, you can access those variables (e.g., `chart.L()`).
 
  * Mapped Attributes: these are mappings between data attributes (e.g., a column in your dataframe) and visualization
  attributes (e.g., the ratio of a circle). For instance, in the `force` visualization these are the mapped attributes:
  ```python
    'attributes': {
        'node_ratio': {'min': 8, 'max': 16, 'value': None, 'scale': 'linear'},
        'link_opacity': {'min': 0.5, 'max': 1.0, 'value': None, 'scale': 'linear'},
        'link_width': {'min': 0.5, 'max': 1.0, 'value': None, 'scale': 'linear'},
    }
  ```
  This means that, in JS, you will have a variable available named `_var_name` (e.g., `_node_ratio`). This variable 
  will be a function that, when called with a datum, will return the corresponding value according to the range and
  scale (which could be `linear`, `sqrt`, or a number - used with `d3.scale.pow()`) defined in the parameters.
  
  Following the `force` example, in Python you can specify a `node_ratio` when calling the visualization in three ways
  (note that `g` is a `NetworkX` graph):
    * `matta.force(graph=g, node_ratio=15)`: all nodes will have ratio 15.
    * `matta.force(graph=g, node_ratio='size')`: node ratio will be proportional to the `size` node attribute,
    using the default minimum and maximum values, and the default scale. 
    * `matta.force(graph=g, node_ratio={'value': 'size', 'scale': 'sqrt', 'max': 32})`: node ratio will be proportional to the 
    `size` node attribute, with `sqrt` scale, with a maximum value of 32. 
   
  * Colorables: these are mappings between data attributes and colors. For instance, the `force` visualization defines
  the following colorables:
  ```python
    'colorables': {
        'node_color': {'value': 'steelblue', 'palette': None, 'scale': None, 'legend': False, 'n_colors': None},
        'link_color': {'value': 'grey', 'palette': None, 'scale': None, 'legend': False, 'n_colors': None}
    }
  ```
  In a similar way to mapped attributes, you can specify a color directly, or by overriding the dictionary for each
  colorable: 
    * `matta.force(graph=g, link_color='purple)`: all links will be colored purple.
    * `matta.force(graph=g, link_color={'value': 'source.bipartite', 'palette': 'Set2', 'scale': 'ordinal'})`: all links
    will be colored according to the `source.bipartite` attribute of each link (this translates to the `bipartite`
    attribute of the source node of each link - yes, you can use dot notation).
  
  Note that, given that we cannot discriminate between a color string and a column/attribute name, we
  need to specify the arguments dictionary. 
  
  The palette name must be recognized by the function [`seaborn.color_palette`](http://stanford.edu/~mwaskom/software/seaborn/tutorial/color_palettes.html#building-color-palettes-with-color-palette).
 
Here is an example of how nodes and links are rendered in their `template.js` file:
 
```javascript
var ratio = _node_ratio(d);
d3.select(this).append('circle')
    .attr('r', ratio)
    .attr('cx', ratio)
    .attr('cy', ratio)
    .attr('stroke', 'grey')
    .attr('stroke-width', 2)
    .attr('fill', _node_color);
```  
    
```javascript
link.enter()
    .append("line")
    .classed('link', true)
    .attr({
        'stroke': _link_color,
        'stroke-width': _link_width
    });
```  
  
### Extra Functions

Your visualization's `__init__.py` file can define other functions. Meanwhile, matta supports the following one:

  * `PROCESS_CONFIG(config)`: where `config` is the current instance of the `VISUALIZATION_CONFIG` dictionary. This is
  used to handle dependencies. For instance, if you specify `leaflet=True` in `cartography`, leaflet is added as a 
  dependency.
  
### Scaffolding

Until now, we have explained how matta allows you to code and render visualizations. They are already usable on the Jupyter
Notebook, but you want to export the visualization into a reusable chart that you can use in your projects. If so, 
it's your lucky day! matta includes that functionality through a method called `scaffold`.

For example, if you look at the `barchart` example you will find this notebook cell:

```python
barchart(x='letter', y='frequency').scaffold(filename='./scaffolded_barchart.js')
```

What this line does is to create a file named `scaffolded_barchart.js` which you can import into your projects. This 
chart uses the reusable pattern mentioned in the introduction of this file. In the "In the wild" section at the end
you can find a couple of links with scaffolded visualizations.

## Credits

matta bundles the following libraries (see the `matta/libs` subfolder):

 * [d3.js](http://d3js.org)
 * [d3.sankey](http://bost.ocks.org/mike/sankey/)
 * [d3.layout.cloud](http://www.jasondavies.com/wordcloud/#%2F%2Fwww.jasondavies.com%2Fwordtree%2Fcat-in-the-hat.txt)
 * [d3.ForceEdgeBundling](https://github.com/upphiminn/d3.ForceBundle)
 * [d3.parsets](https://github.com/jasondavies/d3-parsets)
 * [topojson 1.6.18](https://github.com/mbostock/topojson)
 * [leaflet](http://leafletjs.com)
 * [cartogram.js](http://prag.ma/code/d3-cartogram/)
 * [WebCola](http://marvl.infotech.monash.edu/webcola/)
 * [d3-legend](http://d3-legend.susielu.com/)

It also contains snippets of code from:

 * [D3 Plus](http://d3plus.org/): we use the color text function.

## Next Steps?

 * Build a plug-in structure to define behavior at visualization events (e.g., tooltips, callbacks).
 * Facet data with small-multiples or visualization widgets.
 * Bundle a tooltip library (for instance, [d3-tip](https://github.com/Caged/d3-tip)).
 * Allow to export template versions of visualizations+data (e.g., export to gist).

## About the name

See [Roberto Matta @ Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roberto_Matta).
He has a painting named ["ojo con los desarrolladores"](https://www.flickr.com/photos/83257355@N00/1352671334/?rb=1) (_desarrolladores_ is spanish for developers).

## In the Wild

  * [2|S: Los Dos Santiagos](http://dcc.uchile.cl/~egraells/abrecl/): this is a project where we scaffolded many
    visualizations (Sankey, TopoJSON, Force Edge Bundle) to visualize transport data in Santiago, Chile.
    All visualizations in the page were scaffolded with matta! _Note: the site is in spanish_.
  * [Twitter Data Portraits](http://auroratwittera.cl/perfil/carnby/): this visualization was implemented in matta for my
  doctoral thesis. I needed a way to visualize Twitter profiles and the output of a recommender algorithm. Since the
  data used in the visualization was constantly changing (because algorithms were being developed), I needed a more 
  dynamic way to implement the visualization than always editing JS/HTML files and then reloading everything, 
  including re-execution of algorithms. 
  
## Versioning

matta will use semantic versioning. We start with 1.0.0.

## Testing

There is no automated testing. However, the example notebooks pretty much cover everything. Feel free to contribute in
this aspect!